THE MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 2025
(ACT NO. 24 OF 2025)

PART I: PRELIMINARY

1. Short title and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Application of Act.
(1) Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall apply to:
(a) any vessel which is registered in India; or
(b) any vessel which is required by this Act to be so registered, wherever it may be.

3. Definitions.
(1) "abandoned seafarer" means a seafarer who is deemed to have been abandoned in violation of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the seafarers' employment agreement, where the ship owner:
(a) fails to cover the cost of the seafarer's repatriation; or
(b) has left the seafarer without the necessary maintenance and support; or
(c) has otherwise unilaterally severed ties with the seafarer including failure to pay contractual wages for a period of at least two months.
(24) "Indian vessel" means a vessel which is registered under section 15.
(69) "unseaworthy vessel" means a vessel whose materials, construction, design, crew qualification, cargo stowage, hull, boilers, or machinery are not fit for the proposed voyage or service.

PART III: REGISTRATION OF VESSELS

15. Indian vessel and its registration.
(1) No vessel shall be an Indian vessel unless such vessel is owned by any of the following persons:
(a) a citizen of India including a Non-Resident Indian (NRI) or an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI); or
(b) a company or a body established by or under any Central Act or State Act having its registered office or principal place of business in India.
(2) No vessel which is wholly owned by an Overseas Citizen of India shall be required to be registered as an Indian vessel.
(7) Any Indian vessel proceeding to sea without a valid certificate of registration under this Act shall be detained until a valid certificate of registration is produced to the proper officer.

22. Custody and use of certificate.
(1) The certificate of registration shall be used only for the lawful navigation of the vessel and shall at all times remain in the custody of the person in charge of the vessel.
(3) If the master or owner of an Indian vessel uses or attempts to use for her navigation a certificate of registration not legally granted in respect of the vessel, he shall be guilty of an offence and the vessel shall be liable to forfeiture.

PART IV: MARITIME EDUCATION AND TRAINING

45. Certificates to be held by seafarers.
(1) Every Indian vessel shall have seafarers with manning scales, based on categories of vessel, areas and types of operations, as may be prescribed.
(2) The seafarer shall hold a certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency granted under section 46 appropriate to his rank in the vessel.

PART V: SEAFARERS

59. Minimum age for seafarers.
No person under the age of sixteen years shall be engaged, employed or work onboard any vessel.

60. Medical certificate.
No person shall engage or carry to sea any seafarer to work in any capacity in any vessel, unless the seafarer is in possession of a certificate to the effect that he is medically fit to be employed in that capacity.

63. Agreement with seafarers.
(1) The master or owner of every Indian vessel or recruitment and placement service agency for Indian vessel or foreign vessel shall enter into a seafarers' employment agreement in such form and manner as may be prescribed with every seafarer whom he engages and shall submit a copy thereof to the shipping master.

64. Wages.
(1) Every ship owner of an Indian vessel shall ensure that full payments due to seafarers are made to them at not later than monthly intervals and are given a monthly account of payments due and amounts paid, including wages and additional payments.

PART VI: SAFETY AND SECURITY

127. Unseaworthy vessel not to be sent to sea.
(1) Every person who sends or attempts to send a vessel to sea which is unseaworthy, unless he proves that her going to sea in such unseaworthy state was under the circumstances reasonable and justifiable, shall be liable to a penalty.
(2) Every master of a vessel who knowingly takes or attempts to take a vessel to sea which is unseaworthy, unless he proves that her going to sea in such unseaworthy state was under the circumstances, reasonable and justifiable, shall be liable to a penalty.